# Fq_delta - Efficient storage of processed versions of fastq files.

Fq_delta is a python module and shell script that enables the storage of processed
versions of fastq files generated by DNA and RNA sequencing technologies. By using
Myer's diff algorithm that allows per-character comparisons of two strings, we generate
delta files from the original and edited fastq file. While the delta files generated by
fq_delta can be used to fully reconstruct the original files, they are only a fraction
(0.1 – 2%) of the original size. Depending on the number of processing steps,
implementation of this module will lead to a significant reduction in storage required
for processing sequence data.

A technical note on fq_delta has been published in [EMBnet.journal](http://journal.embnet.org/index.php/embnetjournal/article/view/698).

## Installation

First clone the git repository with,

    git clone git://github.com/averaart/fq_delta.git

Enter the fq_delta repository directory

    cd fq_delta

Use python setup.py to install the module and scripts

    sudo python setup.py install

Two packages are installed in the site-packages folder of you current python
installation: _fq_delta_ and _diff_match_patch_. The former is dependent on the latter.

Two scrips are installed in your /usr/local/bin/ or equivalent folder: _delta_ and
_rebuild_. Both scripts can be called with the option -h to display options.

## Examples

To create a delta file from two fastq files:

    delta original.fastq processed.fastq

This will result in a delta file with the name processed.delta.zip

Rebuilding the processed file to _standard out_ works as follows:

    rebuild original.fastq processed.delta.zip

To rebuild to a fastq file, simply add the new file name as third argument.

	rebuild original.fastq processed.delta.zip rebuilt_processed.fastq

Both _delta_ and _rebuild_ are able to work with _standard in_ and _standard out_,
allowing the user to chain several processes.

    cat -e sample.fastq | \
    sed  's/M\-\^A//' | \
    delta sample.fastq sample.step1 -si 2 -so | \
    sed 's/1{//' | \
    delta sample.fastq sample.step2 -si 2 -so | \
    sed 's/1\^K\^B//' | \
    delta sample.fastq sample.step3 -si 2 -so | \
    sed 's/\$//' | \
    delta sample.fastq sample.step4 -si 2 -so > sample.processed.fastq

